>>Throughout this
series, I have been
trying to explain two
fundamentally different ways
of looking at our world-- one
characteristic, predominantly
of the West, and the
other of the East.
And these might be
called, respectively,
the way of description as
opposed to the way of seeing.
The way, in other words,
of understanding things
in words or in terms.
Contrasted with the way of
understanding through looking
and seeing a field or a
subject totally all at once.
Or you might call
these the linear view,
strung out in a line, or the
total view, seeing all at once.
Or the serial view
on the one hand,
as contrasted with the
simultaneous view on the other.
Now, in classical
Western science,
we have depended largely on
this serial, or analytic,
view, which understands
the world by translating it
into ideas, into words, or into,
say, even series of numbers.
The basic feature of
it being that things
are understood in a step
by step way, in sequence.
And insofar as we constantly
look at nature in that way,
we tend to think of nature
as something constructed.
Something, in other words,
made or put together as we
ourselves make and
put things together
through a series of steps.
And perhaps this
gives us the feeling
that if we understood nature
sufficiently, if we understood
in full detail all
the steps which
go to the making
of our universe,
we could ourselves make it.
Now, it's here, you see, that we
get a very fundamental contrast
between East and
West, and especially
through Chinese
and Japanese ideas
of the formation of nature.
Because for them,
it seems extremely
odd to think of nature as
being constructed or made
by a sort of step
by step procedure.
Their feeling is rather
that the world and its forms
are not so much
constructed as grown.
And one of the
most important keys
to an understanding
of Far Eastern thought
is to see the difference between
a view of a constructed world
and a grown world.
Now, to give a sort of
crazy illustration of this,
supposing I construct something.
For example, an
artificial flower.
And you know, when
you get instructions
how to do this, and you but
a book of do it yourself
artificial flowers,
you get a step
by step procedure which
tells you what to do.
Step one, take a piece of
wire with a black button
and affix it to the end.
Step two, take the stamens,
previously cut out,
and affix it to the button.
Next step, insert a
disk of sticky material,
push the wire
through the middle,
and then affix the petals.
Here they go.
And notice that
as I put them on,
I take them from outside and
around me things that are bits,
and I bring these
bits together to make
the flower, the
construction, or whatever
form it is that I'm
intending to create.
And so from going
around to the center,
from getting something
that was previously pieces
and bringing it all
together, I get my flower.
But now, watch how an
actual flower grows.
How it starts, as it
were, from the center.
And it unfolds itself,
not bit by bit,
but all the parts of the
flower exfoliating together,
from the center outwards.
In contrast to the
making process,
which goes from the
outside inwards.
From a situation where the
parts our originally all apart,
all in bits, and then assembled.
Contrasting with
a situation where
you have some simple beginning,
like a seed or a bud.
And as it expands, it
constellates, or forms,
its own parts from
within itself.
And this is the fundamental
process of natural growth.
It's in the same way
that the human baby
is formed within the womb.
It's in the same way that
if you watch crystals
under a microscope
forming in a solution,
you will notice the whole
area of the crystal,
the whole structure
of the crystal coming
into being all together at once.
And you will not
see a kind of bit
by bit assemblage, which we
use when we make machines,
or make houses, or make tools.
Even when we carve
a block of wood,
although the block of
wood is not originally
a lot of distinct parts.
Nevertheless, we work
upon it from the outside
towards the inside.
Whereas all processes of
growth go from the inside
to the outside.
Now, in our current
scientific way
of thinking in the West,
this kind of growth,
this kind of formation
is always talked
about in terms of what
we call field theory.
Fields of force.
And I suppose one of the most
striking exhibitions of what
a field is can be
seen in looking
at the formation of magnetic
lines of force in iron filings.
As when we take filings
that are not magnetized,
just thrown chaotically
over an area.
And then with the
magnets underneath,
notice that all the filings
form together into a pattern.
The whole area moving together,
every single part of it
simultaneously into its shape.
And that shows us the whole
nature of a field of force.
Now, the fascinating
thing is that some
of these fundamental
words which we've
been studying
throughout this program
form the basic
principle of nature,
or the basic reality
underlying the world,
are words that have
the meaning of a field.
Let's take, for
example, the word
I introduced to you
some programs ago.
A term used in Buddhism, Sunya.
Sunya, which meant the void--
the great space, as it were,
underlying the whole world.
This has in it the
idea of a field
in the same way that basic
Chinese word Tao also
has the idea of a
field of forces,
an area in which
everything happens.
Or again, the
Hindu word Brahman.
Although it doesn't
literally mean a field,
it's also often symbolized by
the idea of a vast inclusive
space.
And the direct connection of
this with the idea of a field
comes out in another Buddhist
word which describes the entire
.
Universe.
This Sanskrit word, Dharma, that
means, well, law or function.
Sometimes it means
the Buddhist doctrine.
Sometimes it means a method.
But you could say Dharma,
in this particular context,
means the fundamental
order of the world.
And so the expression meaning
universe is Dharma-Dhatu.
And this Sanskrit word, Dhatu,
is usually translated "realm."
But it has the idea of a
field, especially when you
see its Chinese equivalent,
which is written this way.
And here we have the character
at the top actually means
a field.
And the bottom part of the
character means a shellfish,
but think of something like
a clam with two shells.
And giving one the idea of
inclusion, or enclosing in.
The enclosed within a field.
This is Dharma-Dhatu.
And then in turn, in the
field there is a structure.
And the structure
of the field is
thought of as governing the
formation of the universe.
And you may remember
that in the last program
I gave you a particular
Chinese word which
meant the basic pattern
or order of the world.
Do you remember this word
which is pronounced Lee,
and which had as its original
meaning the markings in jade,
the fiber in muscle,
or the grain in wood.
This word then designates the
basic structure within the Tao,
within the fundamental
field of the world.
And thus, its order,
which can be, as it were,
understood by looking at it.
But is too complex, too much
happening so fast, all together
at once for us ever to be able
to analyze it in the relatively
clumsy language of words.
Now thus, you see,
it seems to us
that that order is
enormously complex.
The order of nature, the order
of beauty, the order of ethics,
all these kinds of
orders baffle us
when we try to think
about them bit by bit.
But actually, this order
is only a complicated order
when we try to think about it.
I mean, it's very
simple, isn't it,
to drink water if you put
it in a cup or a glass
and toss it down.
But it would be
extraordinarily complex
if one tried to drink
water with a fork.
And in the same way, the world
and the order of the world,
the activity within the field,
seems incredibly complicated
to us when we try
to translate it
into thinking and into words.
But this then is the fundamental
Chinese Taoist and Indian
Buddhist view of how the
formations of the world arise.
Not by a step by step process
which can be put down in a line
like the instructions
for making the flower .
But by something which happens
spontaneously all together
at once.
And this particular
form of activity
is commonly represented
in Eastern art
by many armed and many headed
figures of various divinities.
Such as this particular
Tibetan figure of Quan Yin.
You know, Quan Yin is sometimes
known as the goddess of mercy,
but actually, Quan
Yin only became
a goddess figure when
it reached China.
The original meaning
of this figure
is a representation of the
power aspect of nature.
And this wonderful
Tibetan figure
is graciously lent from the
collection of my friend, Mr.
Ching Wah Lee here
in San Francisco.
But the interesting
thing about it
is, you see, that the figure
has three faces and eight arms.
And you might think
that that presents
an incredible problem
of coordination.
But isn't it really
the same problem
that we have in being alive
in the simplest and most
fundamental way?
Our own bodies, without our
thinking about it at all,
are doing all kinds of
things all together at once,
and we don't have to
stop to think about it.
You remember the little
rhyme-- thinking of creatures
with many arms-- the
little rhyme that says,
the centipede was happy
quite until a toad in fun
said, pray, which
leg goes after which?
This worked its
mind to such a pitch
it lay distracted in a ditch,
considering how to run.
And you may have noticed
the same thing can happen
to us when we think too
hard about how we breathe.
Or if you're doing
something to which you're
accustomed in quite
a mechanical way,
like knitting or
tying your neck tie.
When you begin to think about
it too hard, you get balled up,
and you start dropping stitches.
And so one might ask, how
is it possible for Quan
Yin, this figure that we have
seen, to use so many arms,
to use so many
faces, so many eyes?
It's the same question.
How can the centipede
use so many legs?
How can we make our
bodies function,
all the different parts of
it going together at once
without having our having
to think about it at all.
And the answer that the
Eastern world would give
is that it happens because
it is a field of forces.
It is, in other words, the
process that's going on,
not governed by a boss, but a
process that is self-governing.
Because you see, their
idea of nature corresponds,
perhaps we would say, to
a democracy rather than
a monarchy.
In a monarchy, we have a
political type of order
where one mastermind is telling
all the other people what
to do.
But we are aspiring, aren't
we, in a democratic kind
of political setup.
To have something that is
not so much like a monarchy
as it is like a living organism
which is self-governing,
where all the parts
develop independently
and yet harmoniously in terms
of the pattern in a field.
And so speaking of the
fundamental principle
behind the world, old
Lao-Tzu-- you remember him.
I'll write his name
down again, just
in case you forget
this rather difficult
Chinese pronunciation, Lao-Tzu,
the founder of the Taoist
philosophy.
Said to have lived about 600 BC,
but probably lived much later.
He said, speaking of
Tao, the great Tao
flows everywhere, both to
the left and to the right.
By it, all things
come in to being.
It loves and nourishes them,
but does not lord it over them.
Merits accomplished,
it lays no claim to.
In other words, this is an idea
of the ultimate reality which
does not govern the
universe by ruling it,
by telling it what to
do, but by, as it were,
letting it be free to
organize itself harmoniously.
In the same way as you
saw the iron filings
organizing themselves
within the magnetic field.
In the same way as
you saw the natural
rose growing as distinct from
the artificial daisy being
made by being put together.
Now then, these forms
of Asian philosophy
want us, as individuals,
to feel that we participate
in this great
democracy of nature.
No longer as
isolated individuals
trying to push it
around, or command it
like monarchs or bosses.
For their conception of
the omnipotence of nature
is not like the
omnipotence of a king,
but of a self-governing state.
Not a mere collection
of units, but a body,
a self-organizing pattern.
And they want us to feel that
the true self of each one of us
is that entire pattern.
Now, in the ordinary
way, we feel
that although I am doing certain
things, nevertheless most
of what is going
on in the world is
happening quite
independently of me.
The motions of the
clouds and winds,
the circling of the stars,
the fluctuation of the tides,
the flowing rivers.
All these seem to happen quite
independently of the individual
me.
And yet, the flowing
of rivers, which
seem to go along by
themselves, are surely
neither more nor
less independent
of the individual me than
the beating of my own heart.
Which, although it seems to
go on independently-- I mean,
I don't will the
beating of my heart.
Nevertheless, what is
more fundamentally me,
the very center of my
physiological life?
And if I don't will the
beating of my heart, might it
not also be possible to
feel that although I do not
will the motions of the winds,
the tides, and the stars,
that these are
nevertheless just as much
my activity as the coursing
of the blood in my veins.
Moving without my having
to think about it,
like the centipede's legs.
Might we not be able to feel
that the whole eternal universe
is our body?
Like this system here
in which every point
is defined by its ties
with every other point.
Now then, the fundamental and
final question that remains
is, how are we to
come to feel that way?
How are we not just to think,
but actually to realize,
to make real to
ourselves, to feel
that the motions of
the heavenly bodies,
the rivers, the seas, the
winds, are all my body.
How are we to feel the general
impression of life in which man
is no longer the isolated,
lonely, separate ego trying
desperately to defend
himself by attempting
to become the world's monarchy?
But feeling rather,
instead, a profound kinship,
and fellowship,
and fundamentally
love for the whole world just
as if it were his own body,
which in this view, it is.
The thing which all these great
Eastern philosophies insist
upon, whether they be Indian
or whether they be Chinese,
is at first sight
rather depressing to us.
Because the fundamental insight
is that our ego and our will
can do nothing to
acquire this feeling
of fundamental unity
and solidarity.
It can't do anything at all.
And the feeling cannot
be had until, as we say,
we have given up our own will.
Set aside our own ego.
This after all too corresponds
with the great basic Christian
insight where, as for example,
Dante says of the will of God,
in his will is our peace.
Or as another
Christian writer says,
our wills are ours
to make them thine.
In all the great religious
traditions of the world,
there is the recurrent
theme of self-surrender
of giving up one's self.
Now at first sight, this
seems something spineless.
This seems something weak and
namby pamby, as if-- you know,
the Marxists always
say, religion
is the opium of the people.
And they validate their point
of view by saying, look,
religion always tells people
to give up their will.
That's so that the tyrant
can push them around,
the nasty capitalists can
make them do what they want.
But they forget that in the
giving up of our own will,
we do not surrender
power, we gain power.
Because in the giving
up of our own will,
we are, as it were,
making ourselves
an empty channel through which
a greater power than our own
can pass through.
Lao-Tzu said, you know,
the usefulness of a window
is not so much in the
frame as in the empty space
through which
something can be seen.
And so in the same
way, you might
say that the power
of a human being
is not so much in his
particular individual identity
as in a certain
kind of emptiness
through which
something can flow.
And so all the great
religions of the world,
and most especially
those of the Asian world,
have as their deepest
insight the principle
that man comes into his own
and finds his true power
in standing out of his own way.
In getting out of his own light.
And this involves, as I said,
the surrender of our own will.
But you see, always
the problem is
how does the will
surrender the will?
There is a Chinese saying
that when the wrong man uses
the right means, the right
means work in the wrong way.
In other words, if
I'm the wrong man,
that is a willful, selfish,
domineering person.
Anything I do to
give up my will will
be motivated by my
fundamental selfishness.
I shall be, in other
words, like a clever woman
who wants to get her man.
But she knows that this
particular man always
runs away if you go after him.
So she acts as if
she doesn't want him.
She gives him up apparently.
But her real motive is,
of course, to get him.
And therefore, she is just,
as it were, playing a trick.
It's a kind of clever
feminine wile, or deceit.
And so in the same
way, if we say,
now, I'm going to
surrender my ego.
I'm going to be unselfish.
I'm going to give up my will so
that I can become one with God.
Also that I can feel
this splendid fellowship
with the whole
universe, and feel
that my identity is no longer
lonely little me, but all.
I shall have as the fundamental
motive doing it, after all,
for my own advantage.
After all, because
this is a new way
of finding spiritual and
psychological security.
And so because it is basically
insincere, it won't work.
And therefore, what
is at first sight
depressing about
Eastern insights
into this matter is not
only that our will, when
it is aggressive and
assertive, stands
in the way of this
understanding.
It also goes on to say that we
cannot even surrender our will
on purpose.
And that when it becomes
perfectly clear to us
that there is nothing at
all that we can do about it,
either positively by trying
to achieve something,
or negatively by
giving ourselves up,
this is the
fundamental deflation
of our ego and its whole
domineering quality.
This is the limit.
At this, it doesn't
give itself up.
It sees that it has no
alternative but to give up.
And from the
emptiness, the silence,
the feeling of impotence
that follows this,
the whole vision of
a united world busts
like a flower from its bud.